as the conflict in Gaza intensifies a
public warning from the United States
Israel needs to do more to protect
Palestinian civilians if you have an
opportunity to alleviate the pain you
should do it period And if you don't
you're going to lose credibility
worldwide my guest this week from Israel
is Amy Aon former head of the shinb the
country's internal security service will
Israel heed the US warning if somebody
um Can advise us not what to not what
not to do but how to destroy the
military capability of Hamas without
human suffering uh I am ready to uh to
listen to every advice so what happens
next does Israel's government have a
plan for the future and can anything
good be salvaged once this war is
over Amy ion welcome to conflict Zone
thank you for the invitation you said
last month that if Israel went ahead
with a ground invasion of Gaza many
Israeli soldiers and many more
Palestinians would die is there a point
in your view at which the human price of
this war as it's being fought becomes
too high for you for
Israel no uh no because of two reasons
um I I never knew how to measure human
life and I cannot compare it to any
military achievement so
I I never could uh could give a an
honest answer uh to this question but
does it worry
you yes it is but it wor me um since
from from the very first day so uh and
you asked me about um something that for
me
um I have to um I have to try to measure
human life um and um and what will be on
the other side so the concept of
Victory uh which is uh very unclear
today uh should be measured uh by human
life it's something that I find very
very difficult to do um I'm ready to
speak about um the goal of um of this
military campaign or the goal what we
are doing today but I cannot give you an
honest answer to uh to measure this goal
with human life let me put it another
way are are you comfortable with first
the the total blockade of Gaza and then
the meager humanitarian supplies that
are being allowed to trickle into the
strip and I asked because I wonder what
the military value is of cutting off
food medicine and water to Gaza
civilians uh in order to um to measure
um or to evaluate what we are
doing um I cannot uh tell you an honest
answer um when I when you ask me uh when
you want me to to to measure it in human
life but I can tell you uh what we are
trying to
achieve and um and I think I believe and
I totally believe that you will agree
with me that the less uh civilians um
will be killed when we are trying to
achieve our goal um the concept of
Victory uh will be will give us any
sense so uh what we are trying to do now
is uh to destroy the military wing and
the military capability of Hamas which
means
Alam and I believe that this is um this
is
uh the only way for us um to create a
reality in which both Israelis and
Palestinians will be able to live uh in
a totally different
reality but you you're suggesting that
the methods um that Israel is using at
the moment are Justified because of the
end goal is that right no no no no um
well I I I left the military uh
Community 30 years ago and uh and I left
the shin which is the intelligence
Community uh 25 years ago so I'm not
sure that I'm in a position uh to advise
to our military generals um exactly what
to do um all what I can say that I think
that one of the major parameters should
be to kill as less as possible civilians
and to make sure that everybody
including Israelis uh people who are
living in Britain Europe America will
understand that we should do everything
in order to achieve this goal and to
remind especially to you people who are
living outside that Hamas will do
everything in order to use his people as
a human shield so it is a totally
asymmetric conflict and asymmetric
um you know uh way that we we measure
human life your your president president
herzo said on October the 13th it's an
entire nation out there that is
responsible he was talking about the
gazans it's not true this rhetoric that
civilians were not aware not involved
they could have risen up they could have
fought this evil regime do you go along
with that no I totally
disagree um Hamas Was Not
Elected by the people who lives in Gaza
Hamas took over by killing fat people
and Palestinian Authority uh you know uh
security uh security people so I totally
disagree I think that um we have to
emphasize something that which is
totally different from what I understand
our president said we do not have war
with the Palestinian people we do not
have war with the Palestinian innocent
Palestinians who are living
Gaza they hate Hamas Hamas before this
War uh got support from between 20 25 to
30% of the Palestinians who are living
under his control so uh and they do not
have the power Hamas is using his
military power not only against us so
our our our enemy is Hamas
by the way that you know it's behave
like Isis they left the concept of
persuation and da that you know uh he
came with uh when he was born uh during
the 70s and the 80s they are killing
civilians like Isis so
our goal is to destroy the military
capability of Ain Hamas and not to kill
Palestinians we do not have war with the
Palestinian people and if you inflict
tremendous hardship on those Palestinian
people in the course of fighting Hamas
that's just collateral damage is it
that's just what you've got to you know
I I I hate I hate the idea of collateral
damage um I think that um you know um we
uh we kill
people um but uh um but we are
trapped um I don't want to tell you what
you Europeans did in Afghanistan and
Iraq uh it's for me it's
irrelevant uh but at least I know I
know most of the general all the
generals in the in the in the IDF I know
them and I know that they will do
everything in avoid in order to avoid
what you call collateral damage and I
say or call uh The Killing uh of of
civilians and um and that's it but we we
are Corner because the reality in which
on one side of what we call
border leaving Israelis and on the other
side of the Border Hamas
control the Palestinians is unacceptable
anymore we were stupid enough in order
not to see and probably we made many
mistakes and I blame my prime minister
and I still blame him for you know
creating Hamas to the evil level of evil
that we see
today but we cannot go to the past and
to discuss our mistake we did mistakes
but
for our our problem today is how to
fight Hamas and yes I do agree
that we have to say again and again and
again our enemy are not the Palestinian
people and this is why I say to the
Israelis not all of them you know agree
with me unless we should speak not on
the military
go we are speaking all the way on
military achievement military goal
unless we shall Define a political goal
Victory is not measured in military
terms the political goal should be to
revive the concept of two states it will
take years but the the concept you know
we have to we have to create a different
story to what we are doing today and the
story should be we are doing today
because we are fight we it's not a war
of Revenge it's a war in order to defend
our
people how worried are you that having
raised the issue of humanitarian
hardship with Israel in private uh
America is now airing significant
concerns in public and I wonder can the
Israeli government afford to ignore
those concerns Anthony blinken the
Secretary of State said just last week
while Israel has the right to defend
itself the way it does so matters it
means food water medicine and other
humanitarian assistance must be able to
flow into Gaza and to the people who
need them um Israel doesn't seem to be
taking too much concern with with that
uh
strcture well I um I totally agree uh
but I would
raas um the the last sentence that
Israel do not really care uh I agree
that humanitarian uh you know issue
humanitarian issue meaning you know
human suffering and human and human uh
people innocent people dying yes uh we
we we have to take it in account um we
cannot measure it but uh I I don't think
that um you you didn't mention the
people the Israelis uh who are uh you
know being
hostages uh in the hands of Hamas uh I
think that um we we will not be able to
measure the concept of Victory without
measuring human life and without
bringing back the Israelis who were
kidnapped children uh elderly and and
and you know innocent people who are
suffering now um in the hand of Hamas
President Biden said on his way back
from Israel I was very blunt with the
Israelis Israel has been badly
victimized but you know the truth is
that if they have an opportunity to
relieve suffering of people who have
nowhere to go that is what they should
do that's a really blunt public warning
isn't
it it seems that I emphas exactly and I
totally agree um that we have to keep in
mind and we have to try to do um to
avoid um as much as we can um the human
suffering do you think Israel is doing
that I think that we are trying to do it
um and I I said and I I will repeat it
again and again and again uh if somebody
um Can advise us not what to not what
not to do but how to destroy the
military capability of Hamas without
human suffering uh I am ready to uh to
listen to every advice but what is
happening you know uh people you know
tend to forget um the
violence um and the
cruelty um that we faced exactly one
months ago when women was were raped and
and children were assassin
um and um and every time when we are
blamed for human suffering um yes I'm
ready to listen to every advice how to
destroy the military capability of H
without doing it you once talked in a
film called The Gatekeepers 2012 you
talked about what happens when large
numbers of people start being killed
through targeted assassinations you you
said suddenly the processes become a
kind of conveyor belt you ask yourself
less and less where to
stop and I ask you is that's what has
been happening with Israeli attacks in
Gaza a conveyor belt approach no it's
it's let's let's what I said on 2012 or
I don't remember exactly when um is
totally true um I think that um we did
many mistakes um I think that we did
many mistakes uh when we did not
understand the Palestinian people and in
a way I totally agree that our mistakes
um you know um created or did not
stop the phenomena of Hamas the way we
see it today but we are discussing the
past and the past with all our mistakes
and their mistakes will not help us now
because we are fighting now against
something that
we cannot accept its existence and what
I'm trying to explain that we should not
forget the mistakes of the future but we
have to start by designing the future
and the future should be to revive the
idea the concept and the process that
will create reality of two states
instead of trying to explain us how to
behave on the military
campaign Mr ion what comes next
President Biden has said there has to be
a vision of what comes next um you've
talked about Reviving The idea of a
two-state solution giving the
Palestinians a political perspective do
you see any sign of that vision from
your government or is the war it as far
as they're concerned no it's uh first of
all I don't see it uh when I listen to
our uh um you know cabinet ministers but
I want to be very honest with you U I do
not listen to them uh but I see the
change and finally you have to
understand Israel with all our mistakes
is still a great democracy and we saw it
not today we see it not today we saw it
during the last uh six months and and
this is why I look and I see when I meet
people in the street and I'll give you
one example the example is you know uh
Israelis were asked about uh two weeks
ago uh who should replace Hamas uh when
the vacuum in Gaza will be created
assuming that it will be created between
70 to 80% of the Israelis said it should
be Palestinian Authority now you
couldn't hear it a month ago but you're
not hearing that from the government are
you the government has now said
it's going to take over security control
of Gaza afterwards no no political
perspective the problem is that you
listen to our ministers and I listen to
the Israelis and let me tell you
something you know this government is
over they don't know it yet probably but
this government is over you know why
because we are a democra and when
hundreds of thousands of soldiers will
come back from this campaign they will
not go back home they will go to the
streets and they will
demand this prime minister and this
cabinet minister to disappear from our
life and this is you know if there is
hope in order to listen to hope to see
the hope you shouldn't listen to our
ministers you shouldn't listen to our
government you should try to understand
the Israelis
and this is what you will hear from the
Israeli people you talk about a
two-state solution and I'm wondering
where you put those two states because
Israel has already said the Jewish
people have exclusive rights to the land
contained within your current Borders or
words to that effect so de facto
annexation has already taken place
hasn't it what does that leave what does
that leave for the Palestinians no you
are asking a question which is based on
totally wrong assumptions
um I think that only only between 10 to
15% of Israelis accept the concept of
annexation and even these people you
know many of them are doing it because
what we learned after Oslo when we were
looking for security we got Terror and
in but as you pointed out you pointed
out at the time that the Palestinians
who who wanted a state got settlements
didn't they exactly exactly that's all
they got from wanting a state no it's
not we can change it we can change and
the only way to change the way we
understand ourselves is a change the way
to understand the future and this is the
role of the Israeli Society but let me
tell you something this is a role of
everybody because it is not only a
between Palestinians and Israelis
anymore it is a regional conflict and
will
destabilize
even
probably I don't know the global
stability because let me remind you that
the energy from the Persian Gulf you
know uh is is a vital for India and
China and if China will enter so
everything is different so I think that
this is it became the interest of
Britain of Europe America and everybody
who care about stability and this is why
it is not only our goal it should be the
goal of everybody who care and it is in
our hands to change the perspective in
which we see the future and once people
will believe that it is achievable and
this this is exactly what we saw during
the 90s once people will believe that it
is achievable they will support it if
you look at what's going on in the West
Bank the settler violence against
Palestinians that has been reported and
commented on by President Biden recently
um that doesn't give much cause for
optimism does it he said this violence
and the settlers responsible had to be
held accountable and the violence had to
stop do you think the people who've been
committing these violence forcing
palestin Ians out of their homes and
their villages in the West Bank will be
held to
account
um I cannot tell you exactly what will
happen but I totally agree with
President
Biden I think that
what I cannot tell you but I do believe
I know what
minority among the settlers are doing
today in the West Bank is a Jewish
Terror
and I totally disagree with what they do
and I think that it is our
responsibility Israel responsibility to
stop them and if you ask me whether we
are doing all what we should I will tell
you no I think that we should do much
more and until it will stop yes we are
accountable and they should be
accountable you've spent a lifetime
dealing in facts how do you rate the
chances of anything good emerging from
this terrible War let let me tell you
something about what happened on the 7th
of
October um everything collapsed the way
we understand ourselves the way we
understand our enemies the way we
understand our friends the way we
understand the world and we shall have
to build Israel from the very beginning
but one thing that
collapsed
is all the rational concept in which we
understand ourself and take decisions so
we I used to see that you know uh if I
if I have to face a problem um I have to
try to measure first of all to look for
the details and the factors and then to
measure and to create scenarios
everything is became irrelevant and if I
cannot tell you what will be the
reasonable
scenario in the near future or in the
far future so I'm not going to deal with
you the only way the only way for me and
many people tell me that I'm not that
I'm naive I'm not naive I'm realistic
because in in in in in a in a reality of
care
the only way to get out is to say okay I
will jump into the future and I will
describe Israel in 40 years from now we
mentioned the film The The Gatekeepers
that you and other former heads of shinb
um talked about successes and failures
um during your time in service um but
there were two statements that stood out
this was in 2012 one was from Ki Gillan
who said that we Israelis he said are
making the lives of millions unbearable
and from Abraham Shalom who remarked we
have become cruel to ourselves as well
but mainly to the occupied population
did you agree with those statements in
2012 and if so do you still agree with
them yes I totally
agree we made we made every mistake uh
the only way to understand
is to ask how come why did we do it and
we did it because we lost confidence in
achieving security because we did
mistakes but Palestinian did mistakes as
well and you mentioned and you are
totally right there are two conflict
conflicting narratives we see only our
narrative they see only their narrative
and the only people who can see both
narratives are sitting in London in
America and in a different planet and
this is your role to help us if you
really care about us yes tell us our
mistakes but tell Palestinians their
mistakes and help us to see each
other Amon thank you very much for being
on conflict Z good to see you thank you
very much thank you very
much
[Music]
[Applause]
he
[Music]